---
title: 'Predictive Maintenance'
subtitle: 'Group-7'
date: 2023-01-20 00:00:00
description: Akshit Goyal, Aswath Rangachari, Tarun Parbhat
featured_image: '/images/Projects/group_12/group_12_thumbnail.jpeg'
semester: 22_fall
---

Made by

Akshit Goyal, Aswath Rangachari, Tarun Parbhat

- Overview
- Results
- Findings


## Overview

In any Industry involving Heavy machinery including manufacturing, transportation, oil and gas, telecommunication etc., automation has been taking the industry by storm. Part of the automation process heavily relies on using Predictive Maintenance in ensuring the equipment is
properly maintained, increasing production capacity and reduction or near elimination of unscheduled equipment downtime caused by equipment or system failure.

Predictive maintenance is the data-driven, proactive maintenance techniques designed to help us analyze the condition of in-service equipment to estimate when maintenance should be performed. This approach promises cost savings over routine or time-based preventive maintenance because tasks are performed only when warranted. 

Our dataset  describes the various conditions Machines are subjected to at any given time. 

To better understand the data, we decided to perform some Exploratory Data Analysis to get insights about the data. Where we saw there was very low presence of Machine Failures in the dataset. 

If
there is any imbalance in the data, Machine Learning Models training as well as testing process
could give out misleading outputs. Hence in order to reduce the bias towards non-Failure data, we augment the data.

And from our models, our goal is to be able to predict Machine Failure by using these various features utilizing Machine Learning Algorithms.



## Results

|         | Logistic Regression | Gaussian Naive Bayes | Soft Margin SVM |
| ------  | ------------------- | ---                  | -----------     |
| Accuracy   | 0.81    | 0.85 | 0.55 |
| F1 Score   | 0.81    | 0.858 | 0.59 |
| Precision   | 0.81    | 0.824 | 0.55 |
| Recall  | 0.81    | 0.894 | 0.63 |

## Findings


We started the project with the goal of predicting Machine Failure and performed Exploratory
Data Analyses, implemented Data cleaning, and leveraged Machine Learning models to
generate the desired results. As per the results from the models, we can conclude that Logistic
Regression gave very positive results and help us set the baseline, but the Gaussian Naïve Bayes
gave the best results with high accuracy and excellent Recall value. For our business problem we
need a good Recall value since it is more important for us to predict Machine Failure when
machine is failing rather than predicting when the machine is working