---
title: MLflow Lab-1
subtitle: 
date: 2023-08-12 00:00:00
description: 
featured_image: '/images/demo/demo-square.webp'
author: Sai Akhilesh Ande
course: MLOps
categories: mlflow
overview: "MLflow - Autolog, Saving and Loading Model"
---

> [GitHub link](https://github.com/raminmohammadi/MLOps/tree/main/Mlflow_Labs)

This lab gives an overview of some of the fundamental **mlops** concepts using **mlflow**:

1. **starter.ipynb**: mlflow - autolog(), logging a model, loading a saved model
2. **linear_regression.ipynb**: mlflow - logging parameters and metrics
3. **serving.ipynb**: mlflow - serving models
4. **serving.py**: mlflow - creating custom artifacts(e.g **extra_pip_requirements.txt**)

## Prerequisites

1. [Github Lab-1]({% link _posts/2023-02-01-GitHub_lab1.md %})
2. Jupyter Lab installed in your system (important to have it installed)

## Setting up the lab

1. Open the local **mlops_labs** directory using Visual Studio Code(VSC) and open a new terminal inside VSC.
2. Create a new working directory for this lab(e.g. **mlflow_lab1**).
3. Move into the working directory using the command **cd mlflow_lab1** in your terminal.
4. Create a **requirements.txt** file and add packages similar to [this](https://github.com/raminmohammadi/MLOps/blob/main/Mlflow_Labs/requirements.txt).
5. Create a virtual environment(e.g. **mlflow_lab1_env**).
6. Activate the environment and install the required packages using **pip install -r requirements.txt**.

## Cloning the necessary files

Copy the following files into your working directory.
1. [starter.ipynb](https://github.com/raminmohammadi/MLOps/blob/main/Mlflow_Labs/starter.ipynb)
2. [linear_regression.ipynb](https://github.com/raminmohammadi/MLOps/blob/main/Mlflow_Labs/linear_regression.ipynb)
3. [serving.ipynb](https://github.com/raminmohammadi/MLOps/blob/main/Mlflow_Labs/Serving.ipynb)
4. [serving.py](https://github.com/raminmohammadi/MLOps/blob/main/Mlflow_Labs/seving.py)

**Project Structure:**

```
    mlops_labs/
    └── mlflow_lab1/
        ├── requirements.txt
        ├── mlflow_lab1_env/
        ├── starter.ipynb
        ├── linear_regression.ipynb
        ├── serving.ipynb
        └── serving.py
```

## 1. starter.ipynb

1. To run **starter.ipynb** in jupyter lab, you have to link your virtual environment to jupyter lab.
2. Run the following command in your terminal to do this. Pass the name of your virtual environment to **--name**.
    ```
    python -m ipykernel install --user --name=mlflow_lab1_env
    ```
3. Run jupyter lab
    ```
    jupyter-lab
    ```
4. Select your virtual environment as your notebook's kernel by going to the **Kernel** menu -> **Change kernel** -> select your virtual environment.
5. Continue with the jupyter notebook.

**Note:**

- In case you cannot run the **!mlflow ui** commands inside your jupyter lab, open a new terminal in VSC, activate your virtual environment and run the same command in your new terminal.

## 2. linear_regession.ipynb

1. Make sure you selected your virtual environment as your notebook's kernel.
2. Continue with the jupyter notebook.
3. If you are unable to run the mlflow commands inside your notebook, open a new terminal inside your VSC, activate your virtual environment and run them there.

## 3. serving.ipynb

1. Make sure you selected your virtual environment as your notebook's kernel.
2. Once your model is ready to serve, get it's **run id** from **mlruns/0/**.
3. Open a new terminal inside your VSC and activate your virtual environment.
4. Run the following command replacing **run_id**.
    ```
    mlflow models serve --env-manager=local -m mlruns/0/<run_id>/artifacts/model -h 127.0.0.1 -p 5001
    ```
5. Make sure the url, port in your notebook and in the above command matches.
    ```
    url = 'http://127.0.0.1:5001/invocations'
    ```

## 4. serving.py

1. Make sure you selected your virtual environment as your notebook's kernel.
2. Run the file
    ```
    python serving.py
    ```
3. Run the mlflow ui
    ```
    mlflow ui
    ```
4. Check the artifacts.